Art of A11Y Initial Launch (#1318)
playfulprogramming/playfulprogramming: content/crutchcorn/collections/art-of-accessibility/posts/art-of-a11y-text/index.md

[As mentioned in the preface](/posts/art-of-a11y-preface), there are three levels of compliance with the "Web Content Accessibility Guidelines" (WCAG) - the industry standard guidelines on accessibility: A, AA, and AAA.

While there are no rules in WCAG's A ruleset, AA and AAA both have different requirements for color contrast between a foreground color and background color:

| Ruleset | Content Type | Min Contrast Ratio |
| --- | --- | --- |
| AA | Small Text | `4.5:1` |
| AA | Large Text | `3:1` |
| AA | Graphical Elements | `3:1` |
| AAA | Small Text | `7:1` |
| AAA |Large Text | `4.5:1` |
| AAA | Graphical Elements| `3:1` |

[This ratio can be calculated either programmatically](https://www.w3.org/TR/WCAG20-TECHS/G17.html#G17-procedure):

```javascript
const CONTRAST_RATIO = (L1 + 0.05) / (L2 + 0.05)
```

> L1 is the relative luminance of the lighter of the colors.
> L2 is the relative luminance of the darker of the colors.

Or manually, using various tools such as [WebAIM's Color Contrast Checker](https://webaim.org/resources/contrastchecker/):

![A contrast checker UI showing the contrast between a blue and a black color](./webaim_checker.png)

## CSS Detection

> When comparing AA to AAA compliance, a common qualm lodged against AAA is that its contrast requirements feel too constrictive for a site's "look and feel" compared to AA's easier compliance ratios.

Reviewer: While WCAG may be mentioned by laws or the executors of laws, but you can't be "WCAG compliant". WCAG has conformance since they are guidelines, and I think that is subtle but important.

```suggestion
When comparing the AA and AAA conformance levels, a common qualm lodged against AAA is that its contrast requirements feel too constrictive for a site's "look and feel" compared to AA's easier lower minimum ratios.
```

Luckily, there are ways we can have both!

Users are able to opt into an operating system's "high contrast" mode, which will notify the browser to follow in suit.

> ![Windows 11's "Contrast themes" showing the different styling of high-contrast modes](./windows_11_high_contrast.png)

Reviewer: These themes apply a [`forced-colors` presentation overriding many authored styles](https://tetralogical.com/blog/2023/04/21/meeting-wcag-level-aaa/#:~:text=There%20is%20no%20separate%20OS%2Dlevel%20option%20on%20Windows%20to%20set%20a%20preference%20for%20higher%20contrast), which makes them not a sufficient technique for passing WCAG's contrast SCs.

![macOS configured to show "increased contrast" with more defined borders and outlines](./mac_os_high_contrast.png)

> This, in turn, is exposed to our site's CSS through [the `prefers-contrast` media query](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/@media/prefers-contrast) :

Reviewer: This sounds like it's suggesting that this is an acceptable way to confirm to WCAG Level AAA, which, as I understand, that's only the case in super limited scenarios right now.

I like it as a practice to enable some applications that otherwise wouldn't have AAA contrast provide an enhanced version, but I don't want the reader to conflate the practice with conformance, especially if they try to use this technique for public websites or to attempt to conform with WCAG Level AA.

It seems like the the bar is quite high to call this conforming to WCAG AAA currently. Like a intranet application for a company that only uses Apple products. Meeting [conforming alternative version](https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/Understanding/conformance#conforming-alt-versions) may be easier by other methods, like an in-page control, but I am hesitant to recommend this to a general audience since conforming alternative versions have their own roadblocks.

---

References:

- Using `prefers-*` CSS media queries only can be considered sufficient to pass a criterion on a case-by-case basis. https://github.com/w3c/wcag/issues/4290#issuecomment-2761758769
- Contrast criteria are authored styles, so Window's "high contrast" (which is really forced colors) doesn't apply, even if you could advocate that your application expects this option to be "widely available and known" to meet the bar for a [conforming alternative version](https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/Understanding/conformance#conforming-alt-versions) (e.g. in a locked down intranet setting) https://github.com/w3c/wcag/issues/4290#issuecomment-2761758769 (my understanding of a draft response in an active conversation with a comment as recent as two days ago)

function changeText(matches) {
	if (matches) {
		el.textContent = "The user prefers more contrast";
	} else {
		el.textContent = "The user has not specified a preference for contrast";
	}
}

// To check the initial value:
changeText(mediaQuery.matches);

// To listen for changes:
mediaQuery.addEventListener("change", (e) => {
	changeText(e.matches);
});
```

<iframe data-frame-title="HTML CSS Detection - StackBlitz" src="pfp-code:./art-of-a11y-html-contrast-detection-2?embed=1&file=src/main.js" sandbox="allow-modals allow-forms allow-popups allow-scripts allow-same-origin"></iframe>

# Text Size

Let's do a similar demo to the one above. Can you read this?

<p style="font-size: 0.5rem">This is very small text</p>

> There is text above this that says "This is very small text".

How about this?

<p style="font-size: 0.5rem; filter: blur(2px)">This is very small text</p>

> The same text is now blurred.

Probably not? Alright! Now how about _this_ one?

<p style="font-size: 3rem; filter: blur(2px)">This is large text</p>

> It now says "This is large text"!

This demonstrates how important text sizing is for so many of our users. 

## `rem` vs `px` Values

> In web development, we often use `px` to represent sizing of things. `1px` _roughly_ means `1 pixel`, which works fine for many things on the web.

Reviewer: Only if we had a deep dive article into device:pixel ratio, viewport sizing, and zooming lol

Want an image to be a certain size? `px` is fine.

Want to add some padding to your header? `px` is probably fine.

> Want to set the size of a font to be larger or smaller than the default? `px` is.... **not** fine.

Reviewer: Nice section!

> Wait, what?

Yes, my dear reader; with very few exceptions your font sizes should not be based on `px` values, but rather utilize an `rem` value instead.

`rem` stands for `root em`. See, `em` is another CSS unit that roughly means "Relative to the parent element's font-size."

```html
<p style="font-size: 1.25rem">
    This is a paragraph that is going to contain some code:
    <br/>
    <code style="font-size: 0.9em">console.log("test")</code>
</p>
```

Here, we're using `rem` to tell our `<p>` element that "regardless of the size of the parent elements, size it 1.25 times the user's default font size" and that the `<code>` element should be "0.9 times the size of the `<p>` element's `font-size`".

> While [we have a guide that explains `em` and `rem` in more depth](https://playfulprogramming.com/posts/web-fundamentals-css), the gist of it is that `em` should be used when you want to position an element's `font-size` relative to its parent, while `rem` should be used for any absolute value of `font-size`.

> Keep in mind that any kind of user-facing font resizing will break if you set a `font-size` `px` value on and of the following CSS selectors:

Reviewer 2: This sentence is confusing to me. What does "on and of" mean?

I get what it's trying to say after rereading it a few times, but it was hard to understand. Consider adding an appropriate way to set rem without absolute units, such as percentages

Author: `on any of` - that was a typo 😅 Also, rephrased a bit to fix the comprehension of this line

- `:root`
- `html`
- `body`

To preserve user-facing font-sizing, you should be keeping all font-values as either `rem` or, in specific usages, `em`.

## Browser Behaviors

> Why does this matter? `px` seems to work fine to me.

Let's do an experiment:

- Open your browser
- Find your settings
  - [In Chrome, this is a deep-link to the right page](chrome://settings/appearance)

>   - [In Firefox, this is a link to your settings](about:preferences)

Reviewer 2: In firefox, I had to reload the page for the resize to show. Consider noting that down here

For whatever reason, clicking the link does not work either, I had to copy paste it. I checked the HTML for the `about:about` page, and it looks the same as yours, so who knows

Great question!

To support user-resizable mins and maxes on dynamically sized fonts, we can use `rem` instead of `px` in our `min()`, `max()`, and `clamp()` usages:

```css
p {
	font-size: clamp(0.75rem, 2vw, 2.25rem);
}
```

----

<p style="font-size: clamp(0.75rem, 2vw, 2.25rem); line-height: clamp(1rem, 2.5vw, 2.5rem)">Each character on this line takes up 2% of screen width but has a min and max <code>rem</code> value</p>

-----

# Headings

When talking about text, it's only natural that heading would come into the conversation.

In HTML, we have 6 levels of headings:

- <p class="text-style-headline-1"><code>h1</code></p>
- <p class="text-style-headline-2"><code>h2</code></p>
- <p class="text-style-headline-3"><code>h3</code></p>
- <p class="text-style-headline-4"><code>h4</code></p>
- <p class="text-style-headline-5"><code>h5</code></p>
- <p class="text-style-headline-6"><code>h6</code></p>

Each of these heading levels represents a new segment of the site with information to all users about how to scan and navigate a page's contents.

While headings might seem fairly straightforward at first, they have a bit more depth than you might expect at first.

## Screen Readers

> Headings help structure the page for your users. Not only can they provide visual structure to a page with the font size, but they can report to a scree-reader to help quickly navigate through a page as well.

Reviewer 2: Scree reader

| Screen Reader | Command                                                      | Shortcut                                                     |
| :------------ | :----------------------------------------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------ |
| Voiceover     | Show heading list (via the Voiceover rotor in the demo above) | <kbd>Command (⌘)</kbd> + <kbd>Ctrl</kbd> + <kbd>U</kbd>      |
| Voiceover     | Go to next heading                                           | <kbd>Command (⌘)</kbd> + <kbd>Ctrl</kbd> + <kbd>H</kbd>      |
| Voiceover     | Go to previous heading                                       | <kbd>Command (⌘)</kbd> + <kbd>Ctrl</kbd> + <kbd>Shift</kbd> + <kbd>H</kbd> |
| NVDA          | Go to next heading                                           | <kbd>H</kbd>                                                 |
| NVDA          | Go to next heading of level [1-6]                            | <kbd>1</kbd> - <kbd>6</kbd>                                  |

> | NVDA          | List all headings                                            | <kbd>Insert</kbd> + <kbd>F7</kbd>                            |

Reviewer 2: Consider adding <kbd>d</kbd> to jump landmarks for NVDA, which would give more context to your future discussion of landmarks

Author: I probably won't do this, only because this section is about headings specifically. Each chapter should list their own screen-reader table like this

After all, it would be atypical for someone to go from `2` to `4` when counting upwards, right?

The same applies for headings: **Headings are expected to be added in a descending order of `1` level of depth at a time**.

For example:

```html
<h2>Heading two</h2>
<!-- Good! Went from 2 to 3 -->
<h3>Heading three</h3>
<!-- Bad! Missing an `h4` -->
<h5>Heading three</h5>
```

However, while you should only count heading levels down by `1` at a time, you can jump back up the count by any number you'd like:

``` html
<!-- This is all allowed -->
<h2>Heading two</h2>
<h3>Heading three</h3>
<h4>Heading four</h4>
<h2>Heading five</h2>
```

## Content Grouping

When working with content that has a distinct grouping of information, it may be tempting to assume that the user can simply use headings to distinguish different parts of the site.

Alas, this isn't true! Take the following example:

![A headphone sales marketing page with a description, features list, and customer reviews](./headphones_mockup.png)

This mockup might be naïvely marked up as such:

```html
<h1>EchoFlow X1</h1>
<img src="headphone.jpg" alt="Black headphones with 'EchoFlow X' written on the earcup.">

> <h2 class="visually-hidden">Description</h2>

Reviewer: I feel like this as a novice's intro to `visually-hidden` styles could lead to a overuse of these sometimes necessary hacks that lead to new issues (not unlike the mantra of "the best ARIA is no ARIA").

Without this heading, I don't feel like anything is wrong. The description paragraph belongs just as much to the `<h1>` as the image. Assistive tech would also have the same experience as someone using the screen, which is ideal because these aren't mutually exclusive. Imagine a screen reader user that uses the screen, for instance, they could get frustrated by this sort of usage if common on the website.

<p>The EchoFlow X1 is the world's first...</p>
<h2>Features</h2>
<ul>
    <li>Infinite Playback</li>
    <li>Adaptive Sound</li>
</ul>
<h2>Customer Reviews</h2>
<p>Mind blowing! It's like...</p>
<p>A game-changer for music...</p>
```

But this introduces a problem: Where does one part of the app stop and another part begin?

This is where `<section>` tags come into play. Let's change our markup to the following:

```html
<h1>EchoFlow X1</h1>
<main>
  <img src="headphone.jpg" alt="Black headphones with 'EchoFlow X' written on the earcup.">

>   <section>

Reviewer: `<section>` without an accessible name isn't exposed any differently than a `<div>`. [MDN reference for `<section>` implicit role](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Element/section#technical_summary:~:text=Implicit%20ARIA%20role,%2C%20otherwise%20generic), [Reference from Scott O'Hara](https://www.scottohara.me/blog/2021/07/16/section.html#:~:text=As%20far%20as,exposed%20in%20reality)

There are still some relics of the [document outline proposal](https://adrianroselli.com/2016/08/there-is-no-document-outline-algorithm.html) that was effectively mothballed over a decade ago still around that imply that `<section>` elements are different than `<div>`s even without a label, but that isn't the reality.

Honestly, in this context, I don't think I'd add a label and make it a region though. That seems too verbose.

    <h2 class="visually-hidden">Description</h2>
    <p>The EchoFlow X1 is the world's first...</p>
  </section>

  <section>
    <h2>Features</h2>
    <ul>
        <li>Infinite Playback</li>
        <li>Adaptive Sound</li>
  	</ul>
  </section>

  <section>
    <h2>Customer Reviews</h2>
    <ul>
        <li>Mind blowing! It's like...</li>
        <li>A game-changer for music...</li>
      </ul>
  </section>
</main>
```

Now it's more clear which headings belong to which sections.

>  **Keep in mind:**
>

> > Sections should almost always have a heading as the first child; otherwise it's challenging to figure out what a given section is intended to do.

Reviewer: This is a great rule of thumb for making good documents, but not strictly speaking required or exposed, and potentially misleading. Recommending this already had boxed us into having to use `visually-hidden`.

# Invisible Text

In our previous code sample, you may have noticed that we had the following:

```html
<h2 class="visually-hidden">Description</h2>
```

> What is that class doing?

Well, as the name suggests, `visually-hidden` is a custom class that allows you to keep text accessible by screen-readers and programmatic access, but hidden visually:

```css
.visually-hidden {
  position: absolute;
  width: 1px;
  height: 1px;
  padding: 0;
  margin: -1px;
  overflow: hidden;
  clip: rect(0, 0, 0, 0);
  white-space: nowrap;
  border: 0;
}
```

> Why would we want to have a heading that's visually hidden?

Good question! In the example we showed earlier, it allows for further clarity in the `<section>` to have an associated header.

Let's take a look at some common "do" and "do not"s with visually hidden text.

**Do**:

- Use invisible text to convey information to the user that might only be visual otherwise:

    ```html
    <span>
        <span aria-hidden="true">★★★★☆</span>
        <span class="visually-hidden"> Rating: 4 out of 5 stars</span>
    </span>
    ```

    ```html
    <button>
        <span class="visually-hidden">Settings</span>

>         <svg aria-hidden="true">...</svg>

Reviewer: [`<svg>`s can have titles](https://www.deque.com/blog/creating-accessible-svgs/), which may be a more parallel experience which does not require ARIA (unless adding role and labelled-by for broader support). This example may lead users to expect they need to tell screen readers how to say things.

>         <svg aria-hidden="true">...</svg>

Reviewer: The order of visual to `visually-hidden` is reversed between these two, which caught me off gaurd.

    </button>
    ```

    > **Tip:**
    >

>     > You may even want to add in a tooltip when the user is focused or hovered on a visual-only element to display this text as well.

Reviewer: I am not sure about this being recommending alongside, since a visual-only (`aria-hidden="true"`) element in the tab order would result in a barrier for assistive technology users, and not entering it into the tab order would create a barrier for keyboard users.

And it still leaves many UX issues from tooltips left to the user to solve like mobile users and affordance.

If it's worth abbreviating for a non-disabled user, do the same for a disabled user and don't confuse them or increase their verbosity. If it's worth adding a tooltip to explain it to a non-disabled user, do it for the disabled user.

Author: This recommendation isn't about text abbreviation, it's about things like icon-only elements like a sidebar or bottom nav, et al.

I would argue that it's part of good UX to provide tooltips/hover effects to explain these kinds of things

- Use invisible text to expand one-off acronyms that aren't articulated elsewhere on the page:

    ```html
    <span>
    	$99
        <span aria-hidden="true">/mo</span>

>         <span class="visually-hidden"> per month</span>

Reviewer: This feels like [overriding screen reader announcement, which isn't a great practice](https://adrianroselli.com/2023/04/dont-override-screen-reader-pronunciation.html)

Author: Fair - moved to the `Do not` part
